Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
Zeus  
Cronos, father of the gods, who gave his name to time, 
married his sister Rhea, goddess of earth. Now, Cronos had 
become king of the gods by killing his father Oranos, the First One, 
and the dying Oranos had prophesied, saying, “You murder me 
now, an d steal my throne — but one of your own Sons twill 
dethrone you, for cr ime begets crime.”  
So Cronos was very careful. One by one, he swallowed his 
children as they were born; First, three  daughters Hestia, Demeter, and Hera; then two 
sons — Hades and Pose idon. One by one, he swallowed them all.  
Rhea was furious. She was determined that he should not eat her next child who 
she felt sure would he a son. When her time came, she crept down the slope of 
Olympus to a dark place to have her baby. It was a son, a nd she named him Zeus. She 
hung a golden cradle from the branches of an olive tree, and put him to sleep there. 
Then she went back to the top of the mountain. She took a rock and wrapped it in 
swaddling clothes and held it to her breast, humming a lullaby.  Cronos came snorting 
and bellowing out of his great bed, snatched the bundle from her, and swallowed it, 
clothes and all.  
Rhea stole down the mountainside to the swinging golden cradle, and took her 
son down into the fields. She gave him to a shepherd fa mily to raise, promising that 
their sheep would never be eaten by wolves.  
Here Zeus grew to be a beautiful young boy, and Cronos, his father, knew 
nothing about him. Finally, however, Rhea became lonely for him and brought him back 
to the court of the god s, introducing him to Cronos as the new cupbearer. Cronos was 
pleased because the boy was beautiful.  
One night Rhea and Zeus prepared a special drink. They mixed mustard and salt 
with the nectar. Next morning, after a mighty swallow, Cronos vomited up fir st a stone, 
and then Hestia, Demeter, Hera, Hades, and Poseidon — who, being gods, were still 
undigested, still alive. They thanked Zeus, and immediately chose him to be their leader.  
Then a mighty battle raged. Cronos was joined by the Titans, his half -brothers, 
huge, twisted, dark creatures taller than trees, whom he kept pent up in the mountains 
until there was fighting to be done. They attacked the young gods furiously. But Zeus Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
had allies too. He had gone to darker caverns — caves under caves under ca ves, deep 
in the mountainside — formed by the first bubbles of the cooling earth. Here, Cronos, 
thousands of centuries before - (a short time in the life of a god) had pent up other 
monsters, the one -eyed Cyclopes, and the Hundred -handed Ones. Zeus unshack led 
these ugly cousins and led them against the Titans.  
There was a great rushing and tumult in the skies. The people on earth heard 
mighty thunder, and saw mountains shatter. The earth quaked and tidal waves rolled as 
the gods fought. The Titans were tal l as trees, and old Cronos was a crafty leader. He 
attacked fiercely, driving the young gods before him. But Zeus had laid a trap. Halfway 
up the slope of Olympus, he whistled for his cousins, the Hundred -handed Ones, who 
had been lying in ambush. They too k up huge boulders, a hundred each, and hurled 
them downhill at the Titans. The Titans thought the mountain itself was falling on them. 
They broke ranks, and fled.  
The young goat -god Pan was shouting with joy. Later he said that it was his 
shou t that made the Titans flee. That is where we get the word “panic.”  
Now t he young gods climbed to Olympus , took over the castle, and Zeus became 
theft king. No one knows what happened to Cronos and his Titans. But sometimes 
mountains still explode in fire, and the earth still quakes, and no one knows exactly why.  
One story says that Zeus killed Cronos with a scythe — the same one that 
Cronos had used on Oranos. Perhaps this is the real meaning behind the greeting -card 
pictures we exchange on New Year‟s Day, a rosy li ttle baby confronting an old man who 
carries a scythe. Memories of the old gods crop up in odd places.  
Hera  
Now these  gods reigned for some three thousand years. There 
were many of them, but twelve chief ones. Zeus married his sister 
Hera — a: family hab it. They were always quarreling. He angere d her 
by his infidelities; she enraged him with her strategies. She was the 
queen of intriguers, and always found it easy to outwit Zeus who was 
busy with many things.  
Once, she persuaded the other gods into a plo t against him. She drugged his 
drink; they surrounded him as he slept, and bound him with rawhide thongs. He raged 
and roared and swore to destroy them, but they had stolen his thunderbolt, and he Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
could not break the thongs. But his faithful cousin, the  Hundred -handed Briareus, who 
had helped him against the Titans, was working as his gardener. He heard the 
quarreling under the palace window, looked in, and saw his master bound to the couch. 
He reached through with his hundred long arms, and unbound the hun dred knots.  
Zeus jumped from the couch and seized his thunderbolt. The terrified plotters fell 
to their knees, weeping and pleading. He seized Hera and hung her in the sky, binding 
her with golden chains. And the others did not dare to rescue her, althoug h her voice 
was like the wind sob bing. But her weeping kept Zeus awake. In  the morning he said he 
would fr ee her if she swore never to rebel again. She promised, and Zeus promised to 
mend his ways too. Bu t they kept watching each other.  
Zeus was king of th e gods, lord of the sky. His sister Demeter was the earth -
goddess, lady of growing things. His sister Hera was also his wife, queen of the gods. 
His brother Poseidon, was god of the sea, His other brother, Hades, ruled a dark 
domain, the underworld, the la nd beyond death.  
The other gods in the Pantheon were Zeus‟s children; three of them were also 
Hera‟s. These were Ares, the god of war; Hephaestus, the smith -god, forger of weapons; 
and E ris, goddess of discord, who shrieks beside Ares in his battle chario t. The rest of 
Zeus‟s children were born out of wedlock. Three of them entered the Pantheon.  
The first was Athene, and the story of how she was born is told in the next 
chapter.  
Athene  
Zeus was strolling on Olympus one morning, and noticed a 
new maiden walking in his garden. She was Metis, a Titaness, 
daughter of one of his old enemies. But the war was long ago, and 
she was beautiful. He charged down the slope after her.  
She turned into a hawk and flew away. He turned into a hawk 
and flew after. She fle w over the lake and dived in and became a fish. 
He became a fish and swam after her. She climbed on the bank, and 
became a serpent and wriggled away. He changed himself into a 
serpent, and wriggled after, and caught her.  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 After he left her, he heard a bird  cry and a fish leap, and those wild sounds 
combined to become a prophecy, which the rattling leaves echoed. “Oh, Zeus, Metis will 
bear a child, a girl child. But if she bears again, it will be a son who will depose you as 
you deposed Cronos.”  
 
The next d ay Zeus walked in his garden again, and found Metis there. This time 
she did not flee. He spoke softly to her, and smiled. She came to him. Suddenly, he 
opened his mouth and swallowed her.  
That afternoon he suffered a headache — the worst headache that an yone, god 
or mortal, had suffered since the beginning of time. It was exactly as if someone were 
inside him with a. spear, thrusting at all the soft places in his head. He shouted for 
Hephaestus, who came rushing up with hammer and wedge. Zeus put his head  on the 
anvil, and1 Hephaestus split the mighty skull; then he leaped back, frightened, because 
out of the head sprang a tall maiden in armor, holding a long spear.  
This was Athene, the gray -eyed, the wide -browed. The manner of her birth gave 
her domain o ver intellectual activities. It was she who taught man how to use tools. She 
taught him to invent the ax, the plough, the ox -yoke, the  wheel, and the sail. She taught 
his wife to spin and weave. She concocted the science of numbers and taught it to man 
— but never to woman. She hated Ares, and took great pleasure in thwarting him on the 
field of battle. For all his mighty strength, she often beat him, because she was a 
mistress of strategy. Be fore battle, captains prayed to  her for tactics. Before trial, ju dges 
prayed to her for wisdom. It was she who stated th at compassion was the best part  of 
wisdom. The - other gods didn‟t know what she meant by this. But some men 
understood and were grate ful. All in all, she was perhaps the best -loved god in the 
Pantheon ; the people of Athens named their beautiful city after her.  
There are many stories about Athene — about her skill in battle, her wisdom, and 
her kindliness. But, like the other gods, she was also very jealous. One of the best 
stories is that of Arachne.  
Arachne was a young girl who lived in Lydia, famous for its purple dye. Her joy 
was weaving, and she wove the most beautiful things anyone had ever seen: cloaks so 
light you could not feel them about your shoulders, but warmer than fur; tapestries 
wrought with pictures so marvelous that birds would fly through the window and try to 
eat the cherries off the woven bough. She was a very young girl, and everyone praised 
her — and soon she began to praise herself.  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 She said , “I, I am the greatest weaver in all t he world. The greatest since the 
world began, no doubt. In fact, I can weave better than Athene herself.”  
Athene heard this, of course. The gods are very quick to hear criticism, and very 
swift to act. So she came to earth, to the little village where Ara chne lived.  
The girl was inside, spinning. She heard a knock at the door, and opened it. 
There stood a lady so tall, so sternly beautiful that Arachne knew she must be a 
goddess, and she was afraid she knew which one. She fell on her knees. Far above her 
head she heard a voice speaking softly, saying terrible things.  
“Yes, miserable girl, I am Athene. I am the goddess you have mocked. Is there 
any reason I should not kill you?” Arachne shook her head, weeping. She could not 
answer.  
“Very well,” said Athe ne. “Prepare yourself for death. You have defied the gods, 
and must die.”  
Then Arachne stood up and said, “Before I die, great Athene, let me give you a 
present.” She went in and took a lovely cloak she had woven, and gave it to her. And 
said: “Take this cloak. It must often get cold, up  high on Olympus. This will shield you 
from the wind. Please take it. I am sure you have nothing so fine.”  
Athene shook her head and said, “Poor child. You are being destroyed by your 
own worth. Your talent has poisoned yo u with pride like the sting of a scorpion. So that 
which makes beauty brings death. But it is a handsome cloak, and I appreciate the gift. I 
will give you one chance. You have boasted that you c an spin and weave better than I... 
than I, who invented the lo om and the spinn ing, wheel, the distaff and the  spindle, and 
out of the fleece of the clouds wove the first counterpane for my father, Zeus, who likes 
to sleep warm, and dyed i t with the colors of the sunset.  But, you say you can weave 
better than I. Very well, you shall have a chance to prove it. And your own villagers shall 
judge. Seven days from today, we shall meet. You will set your spinning whe el in that 
meadow, and I shall b e in my place, and we shall have a contest. You will weave what 
you will, and  I shall do so too. Then we will show what we have done, and the people 
will judge. If you win, I shall withdraw the punishment. If you lose, it is your life. Do you 
agree?”  
“Oh, yes,” said Arachne. “Thank you, dear goddess, for sparing my life.”  
“It is not yet spared,” said Athene.  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 The word flashed from village to village. When the time came, not only Arachne‟s 
neighbors, but all the people in the land had gathered in the great meadow to watch the 
contest. Arachne‟ house was the last in the village, and  faced the great meadow. She 
had set up her loom outside the door. Athene sat on a low flat hill overlooking the field. 
Her loom was as large as Arachne‟s cottage.  
The girl went first. At the sight of her sitting spinning there in the sunlight, the 
crowd pushed in so close she hardly had room to work. Her white hands danced among 
the flax, and she worked so quickly, so deftly, that she seemed to have forgotten the 
loom, and to be weaving in the air. Swiftly and more swiftly she tapped on the wool with 
her fingers, making it billow and curl, then rolling it quickly into a ball, then shaking it out 
again; straining the wool into long shining threads with quick  little pokes of her thumb at 
her spindle. It was said that her working was as beautiful as her work,  and when she 
was told that, she always smiled and said, “It is the same thing.” So she wove, and the 
people watched. Then the finished cloth began to come from the loom, and everybody 
laughed to see , for they were joyous scenes. Morning scenes: a little b oy and a little girl 
running in a green field among yellow flowers, chased by a black dog; a maiden at a 
window dreamil y combing her hair; a young man watching the sea, counting the waves. 
And, later, in a purple dusk, that same young man and girl standing  under a tree looking 
at each other. Swiftly and more swiftly the white hands danced between loom and 
spindle. She wove bouquets of flowers for the wedding, and a wedding gown for the 
bride, and a gorgeous cloak for the young husband.  And, remembering what  Athene 
had said before, she spun a counterpane for their bed. Each square not a block of color, 
but a little picture — one from the childhood of the man, one from the childhood of the 
bride, all together, mixing, as their memories would mix now.  
The coun terpane was last. When she arose and snapped it out, the people 
gasped and laughed and wept with joy. And Arachne curtsied toward the low hill, and 
Athene began to spin.  
The goddess had conjured up a flock of plump white woolly clouds about her 
hilltop. S o she did not have to comb fleece or draw thread; she used cloud -wool, the 
finest stuff in all the world. And she dyed it with the colors of the dawn, and the colors of 
the sunset, and the colors of sleep, and the colors of storm. Now the whole western par t 
of the sky was her loom. She flung great tapestries acro ss the horizon. Scenes from 
Olym pus — things that mortal man had never hoped to see. Almost too terrible to see … 
Cronos cutting up Oranos with a scythe … Zeus charging across the firmament with his 
Hundred  handed Ones, shattering the Titans... the binding of Zeus, the punishment of 
Hera. Zeus chasing Metis as hawk and fish and snake. Then the birth of Athene herself, Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
springing from Zeus‟s broken head. Then, more quiet scenes. Athene teaching the arts 
to man. Teaching him to plough, to sail, to ride in chariots; teaching the women to spin. 
And, then, finally — muddling it all up, poking her long spindle among the woven clouds 
and mixing them and stirring up a dark strange pict ure — the future of man. Ma n 
growing huge and monstrous, his trees turning to spikes, his fields to stone. Swollen 
and dropsical with pride, building something so loathsome he had to look away while he 
was making it.  
This was too much for the multitude. The vast crowd fell on its k nees and wept. 
Arachne was watching She had never moved from the time Athene had started to work, 
but stood there straight with pale face and glittering eyes, watching. And when the 
people fell on their knees, she turned and went away. She walked quietly t o a grove of 
trees and there took a rope and h anged herself.  
Athene came down from the bill, and spoke no word to the people, who 
dispersed. Then she went to the grove and saw Arachne hanging there. The girl‟s face 
was black, her eyes were bulging, her ha ir was streaming. Athene reached her long arm 
and touched the girl on the shoulder. The face grew blacker, and the eyes bulged more. 
The body shrank; the arms and legs dwindled and multiplied. Then Athene touched the 
rope. It shriveled, growing thinner and  thinner, until it was a frail shining strand. And 
there at the end of this shining silken hair swung a small hairy creature with many legs.  
It looked at Athene, then turned and scuttled up its thread, drawing it up as it 
climbed. It floated away over the  grass until it came to a low bush, and cast another 
loop, and sat there practicing, for it knew that now it was meant to spin without rivalry 
until the end of time.  
That is why spiders are called Arachnids  by those who know them best.  
Poseidon  
After Cr onos was deposed, the three sons threw dice for his 
empire. Zeus, the youngest, won — and chose the sky. Poseidon 
smiled to himself because the sky was empty, and he knew that the 
impulsive Zeus had chosen it because it looked so high. And now, he, 
Poseido n, could choose as he would have done if he had won. He 
chose the sea. He had always wanted it; it is the best place for 
adventures and secrets, and makes claim on land and sky. Hades , 
who was always unlucky, had to take the underworld. The earth was 
held as a commonwealth, and left to the goddesses to manage.  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 Poseidon left Olympus and came to his kingdom. He immediately set about 
building a huge underwater palace with a great pearl and coral throne. He needed a 
queen, and chose Thetis, a beautiful Nereid,  or water nymph. But it was prophesied that 
any son born to Thetis would be greater than his father, so Poseidon decided to try 
elsewhere. (The prophecy came true. The son of Thetis was Achilles, Who undoubtedly 
was greater than his father Peleus.)  
Poseid on chose another Nereid named  Amphitrite. But like his brother Zeus, he 
was a great traveler, and had hundreds of children in different places. He was a very 
difficult god, changef ul and quarrelsome. Although he  did bear grudges, he could be 
pleased, and t hen his smile was radiant. He liked jokes, and thought up very curious 
forms for his creatures. He liked to startle nymphs with monsters, and concocted the 
octopus, the squid, the sea -polyp or jellyfish, the swordfish, blowfish, sea cow, and 
many others. O nce, trying to appease Amphitrite‟s jealous rage, he thought up the 
dolphin, and gave it to her as a gift.  
He was greedy and aggressive, always frying to add to his kingdom. Once, he 
claimed Attica as his own, and stabbed his trident into the hillside whe re the Acropolis 
still stands, and a spring of salt water spouted. Now , the people of Athens did not want 
to belong to the kingdom of the sea. They were afraid of Poseidon, who had a habit of 
seizing all the youth of a town when he was in the mood. So they  prayed to be put 
under the protection of another god. Athene heard their prayers. She came down and 
planted an olive tree by the side of the spring. Poseidon was enraged. His face 
darkened and he roared with fury, raising a storm. A fishi ng fleet was blow n off the sea 
and never came to port. He challenged Athene to single combat, and threatened to stir 
up a tidal wave to break over the city if she refused. She accepted. Zeus heard the 
sound of this quarreling. He cam e down and decreed a truce. Then all the  gods sat in 
council to  hear the rival claims. After he aring both Athene and Poseidon, they voted to 
award the city to Athene because her olive tree was the better gift. After that, Athenians 
had to be very careful when they went to sea, and were often unf ortunate in their naval 
battles.  
Poseidon was very fond of Demeter, and pursued her hotly whenever he thought 
about it. He cornered her, finally, one hot afternoon in a mountain pass, and demanded 
that she love him. She didn‟t kn ow what to do — he was so huge, so implacable, so 
persistent.  
Finally, Demeter said, “Give me a gift. You have made creatures for the sea; now 
make me a land animal. But a beautiful one, the most beautiful ever seen.”  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
She thought she was safe, because she believed he could make o nly monsters. 
She was amazed when he made her a horse, and gasped  with delight when she saw it. 
And Poseidon was so struck by his handiwork that he swiftly made a herd of horses - 
that began to  gallop about the meadow, tossing their heads, flirting their ta ils, kicking up 
their back legs, and neighing joyously. And he was so fascinated by the horses that he 
forgot all about Demeter, and leaped on one and rode off. Later, he made another herd 
of green ones for his undersea stables. But Demeter kept the first herd; from that all the 
horses in the world have descended.  
Another story says it took Poseidon a full week to make the horse. During that 
time he made and cast aside many other creatures that didn‟t come out right. But he 
simply  threw them away without k illing them, and they made their way into the World. 
From them have come the camel, the hippopotamus, the giraffe, the donkey, and the 
zebra.  
In another story, Demeter turned herself into a mare to escape Poseidon. But he 
immediat ely changed himself into a stalli on, galloped after her and caught her. From 
this courtship came a wild horse, Ari on, and the nymph named Despoena.  
Demeter was also a moon goddess. And all through mythology there is a 
connection between horse and moon and sea. The she -horse is gi ven a sea -name, 
“mare ”; the moon swings the tides, the waves have white manes, the dripping horses 
stamp on the beach, and their hooves leave moon -shaped marks. An old, old thing that 
has not entirely disappeared.  
Hades  
When the Greeks buried their dead,  they put a 
coin under the corpse‟s tongue so his soul could pay the 
fare on the ferry that crossed the river Styx. It was 
Charon who rowed the boat; he was a miser. Souls who 
couldn‟t pay for the ride had to wait on this side of the 
river. Sometimes they came back to haunt those who 
hadn‟t given them the fare.  
On the other side of the river was a great wall. Its gate was guarded by Cerberus, 
a three -headed dog who had an appetite for live meat and attacked everyone but spirit.  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 Beyond the gate, in Tartaru s, was a great wide field shaded by  black poplars. 
Here lived the dead — heroes and cowards, soldiers, shepherds, priests, minstrels, 
slaves. They wandered back and forth aimlessly. When they spoke they twittered like 
bats. Here they awaited trial by three  judges — Minos, Rhadamanthys, and Aeacus.  
Those who had particularly displeased the gods were given special punishment. 
Sisyphus, an avaricious king of Corinth, must always pu sh a h uge rock uphill. Each time 
he gets it halfway up, it breaks loose and rol ls down to the bottom, and he must begin 
again. And this he will do for all time. Tantalus who had committed a sin has been given 
a burning thirst, and set chin -deep in a cool, clear stream of water. But every time he 
bends to put his lips to the water, it  shrinks away, and he can never drink. Here he will 
stand as long as Sisyphus rolls his stone.  
But these are special cases. Most of the souls were judged to be not too good 
and not too bad, but simply dead. They went back to the field, which is called the  Field 
of Asphodel, to wait — for nothing.  
Those judged to be of unusual virtue went to the Elysian Fields close by. Here it 
was always holiday. The air was full of music. The sh ades danced and played all day 
long — all night long too, for the dead need n o sleep. Also, these happy spirits had the 
option of being reborn on earth. Only the bravest accepted. There was a special part of 
Elysium called the Isles of the Blest. Here lived those who had been three times born, 
and three times gained Elysium.  
Hades  and his queen lived in a great palace made of black rock. He was very 
jealous of his brothers, and scarcely ever left his domain. He was fiercely possessive, 
gloated over every new arrival, and demanded a head -  
count from Charon at the close of each day.  Never did he allow any of his subjects to 
escape. Nor did he allow a mortal to visit Tartarus, and return. There were only two 
exceptions to this rule, and those are other stories.  
The palace grounds and the surrounding fields were called Erebos; this wa s the 
deepest part of the underworld. No birds flew here, but the sound of wings was heard; 
for here lived the Erinyes, or Furies, who were older than the gods. Their names were 
Tisiphone, Alecto, and Megaera. They were hags, with snaky hair, red -hot eyes,  and 
yellow teeth. They slashed the air with metal - skidded whips, and when they found a 
victim, they whipped the flesh from his bones. Their task was to visit earth and punish 
evil-doers, especially those who had escaped other punishment. They were greatl y 
feared; no one dared say their name. But they were referred to as the “Eumenides” or 
Kindly Ones. Hades valued them. They enriched his kingdom, for their attentions Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
persuaded people to suicide. He enjoyed their conversation. When they returned to 
Erebus after their work was done, they circled low over the palace grounds, screaming 
their tale, and the latest gossip.  
Hades was well -cast to rule the dead. He was violent, loathed change, and was 
given to slow black rage. His most dramatic hour was when he kidnapped  Persephone 
and made her his queen. But that belongs to the next story.  
Demeter  
Demeter means “Barley -mother.” Another name for her is 
Ceres, from which we get the word “cereal.” She was the goddess 
of the cornfield, mistress of planting and harve sting, lady of growing 
things. Zeus was very fond of her. He always obliged her with rain 
when her fields were thirsty. He gave her two children, a boy and a 
girl. The girl was named Persephone, and Demeter loved her very 
much.  
Persephone was raised among flowers and looked like a flower herself. Her body 
was as pliant as a stem, her skin soft as petals, and she had pansy eyes. She took 
charge of flowers for her mother. She was adept at making up new kinds and naming 
them.  
One day she went farther than usu al — across a stream, through a grove of trees, 
to a little glade. She carried her paintpot, for she had seen a stand of tall waxy lilies she 
had decided to stripe. As she was painting their faces, she saw a bush she hadn‟t 
noticed before. She went to look  at it. It was a very strange bush, with thick, green, 
glossy leaves, and hung with large red berries that trembled on their stems like drops of 
blood. She stared at the bush. She didn‟t know whether she liked it or not. She decided 
she did not, and seized  it by its branches, and pulled. But it was toughly rooted and hard 
to pull. She was used to getting her own way. She set herself and gave a mighty tug. Up 
came the bush; its long roots dragged out of the ground, leaving a big hole. She tossed 
the bush asi de, and turned to go back to her lilies, but she heard a rumbling sound and 
turned back. The noise that grew louder and louder was coming from the hole. To her 
horror, the hole seemed to be spreading, opening like a mouth, and the rumbling grew 
to a jangli ng, crashing din.  
Out of the hole leaped six black horses, dragging behind them a golden chariot. 
In the chariot stood a tall figure in a flowing black cape. On his head was a black crown. Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 She had no time to scream. He reached out his long arm, snatched h er into the chariot, 
and lashed his horses. They curvetted in the air, and plunged into the hole again. When 
they had gone, the hole closed.  
Demeter was frantic when the girl didn‟t come home, and rushed out to search 
for her. The tall green -clad goddess r ode in a light wicker chariot behind a swift white 
horse,  a gift from Poseidon. She sped here and there, calling, “Persephone ... 
Persephone …”. But no one answered. All night long she searched, and, as dawn broke, 
she came to the glade. There she saw the u prooted bush and the trampled grass. She 
leaped from her chariot. Then she saw something that stabbed her through — 
Persephone‟s little paintpot, overturned. She lifted her head to the sky and howled like a 
she-wolf. Then  she fell still, and listened. The sun was rising; the birds had begun to 
gossip. They told each other of the heedless girl, and the  strange bush, and the hole, 
and the chariot, and the black rider, and how surprised the girl was when he caught her.  
Then Demeter spoke softly, questioning t he birds. They told her enough for her 
to know who had taken her daughter. She put her face in her hands and wept. Just then 
a little boy came running into the meadow to pick some flowers. When he saw Demeter, 
he laughed. He had never seen a grownup crying  before. But when she looked up, he 
stopped laughing . She pointed at him, whispering, and he was immediately changed 
into a lizard. But he hadn‟t learned to scuttle yet, and just sat there looking at Demeter a 
moment too long, for a hawk swooped and caught  him. We was a lizard for only a short 
while.  
Demeter climbed back into her chariot and sped to Olympus. She charged into 
the throne room where Zeus sat.  
“Justice!” she cried. “Justice…  Your brother Hades has stolen my daughter — 
our daughter”  
“Peace, g ood sister,” said Zeus. “Compose yourself. Hades‟ courtship has been 
a trifle abrupt, perhaps, but after all he is my brother — our brother — and is accounted 
a good match. Think, sweet Demeter. It is difficult for our daughter to look beyond the 
family wi thout marrying far beneath her.”  
 “Never!” cried Demeter. “It must not be! Anyone but Hades! Don‟t you realize 
this is a spring child, a flower child, a delicate unopened bud. No ray of sunlight ever 
pierces that dank hole he calls his kingdom. She ‟ll wither and die.”  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 “She is our daughter,” said Zeus. “I fancy she has a talent for survival. Pray, think 
it over.”  
Then Demeter noticed that Zeus was holding a new thunderbolt, a marvelously 
wrought zigzag lance of lightning, volt -blue, radiant with energy. A nd she realized that 
Hades, who in his deep realms held all stores of silver and gold, had sent Zeus a 
special gift. It would be difficult to obtain justice.  
“Once again,” she said, “will you restore my daughter to me?”  
“My dear,” said Zeus, “when your r age cools, you will realize that this is a fine 
match, the very best thing for the child. Please, go back to  earth and give yourself a 
chanc e to be intelligent about this.”  
“I will go back to Earth,” said Demeter, “and I will not return until you send for  me.”  
Weeks passed. Then Zeus found his sleep being disturbed by sounds of 
lamentation. He looked down upon the earth, and saw a grievous sight. Nothing grew. 
The fields were blasted and parched. Trees were stripped of leaves, standing blighted, 
with the blazing sun beating down. The soil was hard and cracked, covered with the 
shriveled brown husks of wheat and corn and barley killed in the bud. And there was no 
green place anywhere. The people were starving. The cattle had nothing to eat; the 
game could f ind no thing and had fled. And a great wai ling and lamentation arose as the 
people lifted their faces to Olympus and prayed for Zeus to help them.  
 “Well,” he thought to himsel f, finger ing his new thunderbolt, “I suppose we shall 
have to compromise.”  
He sent for Demeter. When she came, he said, “I have been thinki ng. Perhaps I 
have not been quite fair to you.”  
“No,” said Demeter.  
“Do you still wish your daughter‟s return?”  
“Yes,” said Demeter. “While she is gone, no crops will grow. No tree will bear, n o 
grass will spring. While she is gone and while I mourn, the earth will grow as dry and 
shriveled as my heart, and will put forth no green thing.”  
“Very well,” said Zeus. “In light of all the facts, this is my judgment. Your daughter 
shall be restored to  you, and shall remain with you. However, if any food has passed Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 her lips during her sojourn in Tartarus, then she must remain there. This is the law of 
abode, older than our decrees, and even I am powerless to revoke it.”  
“She will have been too sad to e at,” cried Demeter. “No food will have passed her 
lips. She shall return to me and remain with me. You have spok en, and I hold you to 
your word.”  
Zeus whistled, and Hermes, the messenger god, appeared. Zeus sent him with a 
message to Hades d emanding Persep hone‟s release.  
“Will you ride with me to the gates of Tartarus?” cried Demeter. “I have the 
swiftest horse in the world, given me by Poseidon.”  
“Thank you, good aunt,” said Hermes. “But I believe my winged shoes are even 
faster.”  
And he flew out of the  window  
In the meantime, Persephone was in Erebos with the dark king. After the first few 
days of haste and brutality and strangeness, he began to treat her very gently, and with 
great kindness. He gave her rubies and diamonds to play jacks with, had dres ses spun 
for her of gold and silver thread, ordered her a throne of the finest ebony, and gave her 
a crown of black pearls. But she made herself very difficult  to please. She tossed her 
head, stamped her foot, and turned from him. She would not speak to hi m, and said she 
would never forgive him. She said she  wanted to go home to her mother, and that she 
had to attend to her flowers, and that she hated him and always would. As she launched 
these tirades at him, he would stand and listen and frown, and keep l istening until she 
flounced away. Then he would go and get her another gift.  
Secretly, though, so secretly that she didn‟t even tell it to herself, she was rather 
enjoying the change. She did miss the sunshine and the flowers, but there was much to 
amuse her. Secretly she gloated upon her power over this most fearsome monarch. 
Secretly, she enjoyed his gifts and his efforts to please her  and marveled at the way he 
was obeyed. Although she never forgot how he had frightened her when he came 
charging out of that hole in his chariot, she admired the lofty set of his black -robed 
figure, the majestic shoulders, the great impatient hands, and his gloomy black eyes. 
But she knew that part of her power over him was disdain, and so kept flouting and 
abusing him . And, which made him gloomier than ever, refused to let a crumb of food 
pass her lips.  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 He tried every way he knew to tempt her into eating. His cook prepared the most 
delicious meals and his servants bore them to her chamber. But she would pretend not 
to noti ce a thing, and sit there holding her head high, not even allowing her nostrils to 
twitch, although the rich smells were making her wild with hunger. She swore she would 
not eat a mouthful until he had returned her to her mother.  
He was desperate to pleas e her. He set aside a corner of the palace grounds for 
a dark garden, and gave her rare seeds to plant — magical blooms that did not need 
the sunlight. She grew a species of black orchid, and mushrooms, and nightshade, 
henbane, and hellebore. He gave her a  little boy to help her garden, a very clever little 
gardener, a new spirit. He was very deft and good company too, although she noticed 
that his eyes were a bit lidless. She had no way of knowing that he was the same little 
boy her mother had turned into a lizard and fed to a hawk. But he knew who she was.  
She had other amusements too. She liked to wander in the Elysian Fields and 
dance with the happy shades. She was fascinated by the torments, particularly the 
funny man trying to roll the stone uphill, a nd always having to start over again. She 
pitied Tantalus, and when no one was looking, cupped some water in her hands and 
gave it to him to drink. And he than ked her in a deep sad voice. Bu t after she left, it was 
worse than ever; he knew she would not re member him again, and this one flash of 
hope made the ordeal worse.  
Still, she liked her garden best, and that was wher e she spent most of her time — 
more time than ever, because she was so hungry she didn‟t know what to do, and she 
didn‟t want Hades to s ee how she felt. She knew he would think up more delicious 
things to tempt her if he thought she was weakening.  
Standing in the garden one aft ernoon, half -hidden in a clump of nightshade, she 
saw the little boy eating something. It was a red fruit, and he  was eating it juicily. He 
saw her watching and came toward her smiling, his mouth stained with red juice. He 
held out his hand. It was a pomegranate, her favorite fruit.  
“We‟re alone,” he whispered. “No one will see you. No one will know. Quickly 
now — eat!” 
She looked about. It was true. No one could see them. She felt her hands acting 
by themselves, as though she had nothing to do with them. She watched as the fingers 
curled savagely and ripped the fruit across. They dug in, plucked out seeds, and offer ed 
them to her lips. One , two, three… she thought she had never tasted anything so 
delicious as these tiny tart juicy seeds. Just as she swallowed her sixth seed, a high Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 glad yelling cry split the air, and the pomegranate dropped to the ground. It was a cr y 
that any god recognized — Hermes‟ keen herald shout, meaning that he was coming 
with news, good or bad, but worthy of high attention.  
She raced to the palace. The little gardener scooped up the pomegranate and 
raced after her. Sure enough, it was Cousin  Hermes;  his hair tumbled from the wind, the 
wings on his feet still fluttering from the speed of his going.  
“Good day, cousin,” he said.  
Hades loomed next to him, scowling blackly.  
“I bring you a message from your mother. She wants you home. And your h ost 
has kindly agreed to an early departure. How are you? Haven‟t eaten anything here, I 
hope. No? Good! Let‟s be on our way.”  
He put his arm around her waist, and they rose in the air. And Persephone, 
looking back, saw the little gardener rush to Hades w ith the pomegranate in his hand.  
By the time Persephone had come home to her mother, Hades had already been 
to Olympus, and had presented his case to Zeus. Zeus pronounced  his judgment. 
Because the girl had eaten six seeds of the pomegranate she would hav e to spend six 
months with Hades each year.  
Never mind, Mother,” said Persephone. “Don‟t c ry. We must be happy for the 
time that I am here.”  
“I suffer!” cried Demeter, “I suffer! Here…” S he struck herself on the chest . “Here 
— in my mother‟s heart.”  And if I suffer, then everyone else shall suffer too, For the 
months that you spend with that scoundrel, no grass will grow, no flowers blow, no trees 
will bear.  So long as you are below, there will be desolation everywhere.”  
That is why summer and winter are  the way they are. That is why there is a time 
for planting, and a time when the Earth must sleep under frost.  
Birth of the Twins  
Zeus pursued a nymph named Leto. But Hera was watching, so he 
changed Leto into a quail, and then himself into a quail, and t hey m et in a 
glade. Here the sun sif ted through the trees and striped the grass with Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
shadows, and it was difficult to see two quail whose feathers were brown 
and lighter brown. But the eyes of jealousy are very sharp, and Hera saw 
them . She flung a curse, saying, “Leto, you will  grow heavy with child, but 
you shall not bear anywhere the sun shines.”  
She sent the great serpent, Python, to enforce her curse, to hunt Leto 
out of any sunny place she might try to rest. Zeus sent the south wind to 
help the girl,  and she was carried on the wings of the warm strong wind to 
an island called Detos. Python swam after. Before he could reach the 
island, however, Zeus unmoored it and sent it floating swiftly away, pushed 
by the south wind, more swiftly than Python could swim. Here, on this 
lovely island, Leto gave birth to twins — Artemis „and Apollo.  
Artemis  
Father Zeus was by no means an attentive 
parent. He had so many children in so many different  
circumstances he could scarcely keep them all in mind. 
However, he w as not permitted to forget  Leto‟s children. 
They were too  beautiful. And beauty was the quality he 
found most attractive. As h e looked down from 
Olympus, their  faces seemed to blaze from among all the children on Earth. It seemed 
to him that they cast thef t own light, these twins, each one different — Apollo a ruddy 
light, Artemis a silver light. And he knew that they were true godlings and must be 
brought to Olympus.  
He sent for them on their third birthday. He had Hephaestus make Apollo a 
golden bow and a quiver of golden arrows that could never be emptied, and a golden 
chariot drawn by golden ponies. But he withheld Artemis‟ gifts; he preferred her, and he 
wanted her to ask him for things. He took her on his lap, and said, “And what gifts would 
you fancy , little maid?”  
She said, “I wish to be your maiden always, never a woman. And I want many 
names in case I get bored with one. I want a bow and arrow too — but silver, not gold. I 
want an embroidered deerskin tunic short enough to run in. I need fifty oce an nymphs to 
sing for me, and twenty wood nymphs to hunt with me. And I want a pack of hounds, 
please — fierce, swift ones. I want the mountains for my special places, and one city. Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 One will be enough; I don‟t like cities.” She reached up and played with h is beard, and 
smiled at him. “Yes? May I have all these things? May I?”  
Zeus answered, “For a child like you it is worthwhile braving Hera‟s wrath once in 
awhile. You shall have more than you ask for. You shall have the gift of eternal chastity, 
and also the gift of changing your mind about it at any time, which will help you not to 
want to. And, finally, the greatest gift of all: You shall go out and choose your own gifts 
so that they will have a special value.”  
She kissed him, and whispered her thanks i nto his ear, and then went running off 
to choose her gifts. She went to the woods and to the river and to the ocean stream and 
selected the most beautiful nymphs for her court. She visited Hephaestus in his 
smoking smithy inside the mountain, and said, “I‟ ve come for my bow. A silver one, 
please.”  
He said, “Silver is more difficult to work than gold. It needs cool light; it should be 
made underwater. You must go deep beneath the sea, off the island of Lipara, where 
my Cyclopes are making a horse trough for  Posei don, who thinks of nothing but horses 
these days.”  
So Artemis and her nymphs swam underwater to where the Cyclopes were 
hammering at a great trough. The nymphs were frightened at the sight of the huge one - 
eyed scowling brutes, and they hated the no ise of the hammering. But Artemis jumped 
up on the forge and said, “I come wi th a message from Hephaestus. He  bids you put 
aside this horse trough and make me a silver bow and a quiver of silver arrows which 
will fill again as soon as it is empty. If you d o this I shall give you the first game I shoot.” 
The Cyclopes, who were very greedy and tired of working on the horse trough, agreed.  
When they had finished her bow, she thanked them very prettily. But when their 
leader, Brontes, tried to take her on his knee, she tore a great handful of hair from his 
chest. He put her down quickly and went away cursing.  
Holding her silver bow high, screaming with joy, she raced across field and valley 
and hill, followed by her nymphs who streamed after her with flashing knees and floating 
hair laughing and singing. She came to Arcadia where Pan was feeding his hounds.  
“Oh, Pan,” she cried. “Oh, little king of the wood, m y favorite cousin, please give 
me some of your dogs — the best ones, please.”  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 “And what will you give  me in return?” he said, looking at the nymphs.  
“Choose,” she said. “But I should warn you, cousin, that like me they have taken an 
unbreakable vow of chastity.”  
“Never mind,” said Pan. “Keep them. What dogs do you fancy?”  
“That one and that one and tha t one,” she cried. “And this one.  And I must have 
him . . . and him.”  
He gave her his ten best dogs. Three of them were huge black and white hounds 
able to catch a live lion and drag it back to the hunter. The others were lean, white 
deerhounds; any one o f them could outrun a stag.  
Artemis was wild to try out her new gifts. She sent her white hounds racing after 
two deer, bidding them bring back the animals unharmed. She harnessed the deer to 
her silver chariot and drove away. She saw a tree which had been  struck by lightning; it 
was still smoldering. She had her nymphs break pine branches and thrust them into the 
cinders, for night was coming and she wanted light to shoot by. She was too impatient 
to wait for dawn.  
Four times she shot her silver bow. Firs t she split a pine tree, then an olive tree. 
Then she shot a wild boar. Lastly, she shot an arrow into a city of unjust men, and the 
arrow pierced all of them, never ceasing its flight till they were all dead.  
And the people, seeing her ride ov er the moun tains, wielding her silver bow, 
followed by the maidens and thei r torches, called her the Goddess of the Moon. Some 
called her the Maiden of the Silver Bow. Others called her Lady of the Wild Things. 
Some called her the Huntress. Others, simply, the Maiden . And so she had her last gift 
— many names.  
She let no man approach her. Once a young man named Actaeon glimpsed her 
bathing in a stream. She was so beautiful he could not bear to go away, but hid there, 
watching. She saw him, and immediately changed him  into a stag. Then she whistle d up 
her hounds, who tore him to  pieces.  
 
She tried to impose the same rule upon her nymphs, which was difficult. Zeus 
himself seduced one of the most beautiful, named Callisto. When Artemis learned of 
this, she changed Calli sto into a she -bear and whistled to her dogs. They came leaping 
and howling and would have torn the bear to pieces too, but Zeus happened to notice Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
what was going on. He caught Caflisto up and set her among the stars, still in her bear 
shape so that Hera w ould not be suspicious.  
Once Artemis found her vow difficult to keep. But that is another story, the story 
of Oranos, which comes later.  
Apollo  
Apollo was the most beautiful of the gods. His 
hair was dark gold, his eyes stormy blue. He wore a 
tunic of go lden panther skin, carried his golden bow, 
and wore a quiver of golden arrows. His chariot was 
beaten gold; its horses were white with golden manes 
and flame -colored eyes. He was god of the sun 
always. Later he became patron of music, poetry, 
mathematics, and medicine. And, later, when he was a mature god, he preached 
moderation. He bade his worshippers to look first into their own hearts and find there 
the beginnings of wisdom, and to conduct themselves prudently in all things. But in his 
youth he did many  cruel and wanton deeds. Several times he was almost expelled from 
the company of the gods by Zeus whom he had angered with his wild folly.  
As soon as he was given his bow and arrows he raced down from Olympus to 
hunt the Python who had hunted his mothe r. Dryads, who are tattletales,  told him he 
could find his enemy at Mount Parnassus. There he sped. As he stood on a hill, he saw 
the great serpent weaving its dusty coils far below. He notched an arrow, drew his bow, 
and let fly. It darted like light; he sa w it strike, saw the huge coils flail in agony. Shouting 
with savage glee he raced down the slope, but w hen he got there he found the ser pent 
gone. It had left a trail of blood  which he followed to the oracle of Mother Earth at Delphi. 
Python was hiding in  a cave, where he could not be followed. Apollo breathed on his 
arrow heads and shot them into the cave as fast as he could. They broke into flames 
when they hit. Smoke filled the cave, and the serpent had to crawl out. Apollo, standing 
on a rock, shot him  so full of arrows he looked like a porcupine. He skinned the great 
snake and saved the hide for a gift.  
Now it was a sacred place where he had done his killing; here lived the oracles of 
Mother Earth, whom the gods themselves consulted. They were prieste sses, trained 
from infancy. They chewed laurel, built fires of magic herbs, and sat in the smoke, which 
threw them into a trance wherein they saw — and told in riddles — what was to come. 
Knowing that he had already violated a shrine, Apollo thought he mig ht as well make his Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
deed as large as possible, and claimed the oracles for his own — bidding them 
prophesy in his name.  
When Mother Earth complained to Zeus about the killing of her Python, Apollo 
smoothly promised to make amends. He instituted annual gam es at Delphi in 
celebration of his victory, and these he graciously named after his enemy, calling them 
the Pythian games. And he named the oracles Pythonesses.  
Less excusable was Apollo‟s treatment of a satyr named Marsyas. This happy 
fellow had the misf ortune to be an excellent musician — a realm Apollo considered his 
own — and where he -would brook no rivalry. Hearing the satyr praised too often, 
Apollo invited him to a contest. The winner was to choose a penalty to which the loser 
would have to submit,  and the Muses were to judge. So Marsyas played his flute and 
Apollo played his lyre. They played exquisitely; the Muses could not choose between 
them. Then Apollo shouted, “Now you must turn your instrument upside down, and play 
and sing at the same time.  That is the rule. I go first.” Thereupon the god turned his lyre 
upside down, and played and sang a hymn praising the gods, and especially their 
beautiful daughters, the - Muses. But you cannot play a flute upside down, and certainly 
cannot sing while pla ying it, so Marsyas was declared the loser. Apollo collected his 
prize. He flayed Marsyas alive, and nailed his skin to a tree. A stream gushed from the 
tree‟s roots and became a river. On the banks of that river grew reeds which sang softly 
when the wind blew. People called the river - Marsyas, and that is still its name,  
Sons of Apollo  
During the contest with the satyr Marsyas, Apollo won the 
favor of the most playful Muse, Thalia, queen of festivities. With her 
he fathered the Corybantes, or crested dan cers, lithe young men who 
shaved their hair to a forelock and danced at the great rituals.  
Then, roaming the hillsides, he came across a young girl who 
reminded him of his sister. She was a huntress. She chased deer on 
foot, hunted bears and wolves. When he saw her wrestling a full -grown lion, and 
throwing it to Earth, he decided he must have her. Her name was Cyrene. The son he 
gave her was named Aristeus, who taught man beekeeping, olive culture, cheese -
making, and many other useful arts.  
His next adven ture was with the nymph Dryope. He found her tending sheep on 
a mountainside. He hid behind a free and watched her. To his dismay, she was joined Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 by a gaggle of hamadryads, mischievous girls who love to tell tales. So he had to stay 
hidden. He waited for t he hamadryads to leave, but they lingered. Gods are impatient; 
they hate to be kept waiting. He changed himself into a tortoise and crawled out. The 
nymphs were delighted to see him, and turned him this way and that, and tickled him 
with, a straw. He was a  splendid glossy tortoise with a beautiful black and green shell. 
Dryope wanted him for her own, and put him in her tunic. When her friends protested, 
he turned himself into a snake, poked his head out of the tunic, and hissed at them. The 
hamadryads fled,  screaming. Dryope  fainted. When she came to, she was in the arms 
of a god. The son he gave her was Amphissus, founder of cities, and bu ilder of temples.  
But his most famous son was Asclepius. This was the manner of his birth.  
Apollo fell in love with Cor onis, a princess of Thessaly, and insisted on having his 
way, which was unwise of him because she loved an Arcadian prince named Ischys. 
When she was with child, Apollo went on a journey, but set a white crow to spy on her. 
All crows were white then, and w ere excellent chaperons; they had sharp eyes and 
jeering voices.  
It was to Delphi that Apollo had gone. An oracle there told him that at that very moment 
Coronis was entertain ing you ng Ischys. J ust then the crow flew in, wildly excited, full of 
scandal, t elling the same tale. “Your fault! You did not watch her closely enough!” cried 
Apollo. And he cursed the crow with a curse so furious that her feathers were scorched 
— and all crows have been black ever since.  
Apollo could not bring himself to kill Coron is. So he asked his sister Artemis to 
oblige him. She was happy to; she was never fond of his amours. She sped to Thessaly, 
and finished Coronis with one arrow.  
Apollo, very dejected, put the corpse on the funeral pyre and lighted the fire. 
Then he rememb ered that she was with child by him. Hermes, who was standing by 
waiting to conduct her soul to Ta rtarus (that was one of his duties), understood the 
situation in a flash. He delivered the dead girl of a living child, a boy. Apollo wished to 
have nothing t o do with the child, and asked Hermes to take care of him. Herm es had 
been struck by the way the baby had observed the details of his own birth — watching 
everything with a wide stare, so interested he forgot to cry — and recognized that this 
was an unusua l child. So he gave him into the care of Chir on, the centaur, the fabulous 
tutor. Chiron taught him diagnosti cs, surgery, herbology, and hunting.  
The boy could not wait to grow up. He doctored everyone he could get his hands 
on, and was soon known througho ut the land for his skill at curing the sick. His fame 
reached Apollo, who decided to test him. He appeared at Asclepius‟s door in the guise Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 of a f eeble old man afflicted with ever y loathsome disease known to medicine — and a 
pauper besides. Ascl epius tend ed him with his own hands, and was so gentle and 
skillful that Apollo was amazed. The god resumed his own form and embraced the lad 
and told him he was pleased with his progress. He sent him to see his aunt Athene, who, 
he said, knew certain secrets of mor tality. She too approved of the young man, and 
gave him two vials of Gorgon blood. One vial could raise the dead, the other was the 
deadliest poison ever known. “No, Aunt,” he said. “I need only the first vial. You keep 
the other.”  
Some say that it was by  his own skill that he restored life to the dead, and that 
Athene was simply trying to take some of the credit for herself. Be that as it may, he did 
snatch several patients from the very gates of Tartar us, and Hades was enraged. He 
complained to his broth er Zeus that Asclepius was robbing him. Zeus stood on Olympus, 
hurled a thunderbolt, and killed the young physician together with the patient he was 
tending.  
When Apollo heard about this, he went into one of his wild heedless rages, stormed to 
Olympus, ba ttered in the doors of Hephaestus‟ sm ithy, and there slew all the Cycl opes, 
who had forged the thunderbolt which had killed his son. When Zeus heard this, he 
banished Apollo to Tartarus forever. But Mother Leto came and pleaded with him, 
reminding him of t heir old love. She spoke so beautifully that Zeus relented, withdrew 
the edict of Apollo‟s banishment, and even agreed to bring Asclepius back to life. But he 
suggested that Asclepius be more tactful about his cures, and avoid offending the gods.  
When Aph rodite heard this story, she was bitten by envy. She considered herself 
a favorite of Zeus, but he had never done so much for her. Her heart was bitter against 
Apollo, and she wanted to do him a mischief. She called her son Eros, the infant archer, 
whose s weetly p oisoned arrows infect man and wo man with a most dangerous fever. 
She told him what she wanted.  
Eros had two kinds of arrows — one tipped with gold and tailed with white dove 
feathers; these were for love. The others, made of lead, with brown owl f eathers, were 
the arrows  of indifference. He took up his bow and stalked his game.  
Apollo, he knew, was hunting, so he mad e his path cross that of Daphne,  a 
mountain nymph, daughter of the river god Penaeus. Then, fluttering above them, 
invisible, he shot  Apollo with the dart of love and Daphne with the arrow of indifference. 
When the golden god came running down the slope toward the nymph, he saw her start 
up and run away. He could not understand it. She fled; the god pursued. She was a 
very swift runner,  but great footsteps pounded behind her, and she felt the heat of his 
breath on her shoulders.  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
She ran toward the river, and cried, “Oh, Father, save me! Save me!” And her 
father heard. Apollo, reaching for her, found himself hugging a tree; the rough bar k 
scratched his face. He said, “But why? . . . Why do you hate me so?”  
The wind blew through the leaves, and they whisper ed, “I don‟t know I don‟t 
know…”  
But then the tree took pity on the grieving god and gave him a gift — a wreath of 
her leaves, laurel leaves, that would, never wither — to crown heroes, and poets, and 
young men who win games.  
And still, today, when questioned by losers, laurel trees whisper, “I don‟t know … I 
don‟t know …”  
Hermes  
Young gods were often precocious, but no one so much as 
Hermes who, five minutes after his birth, sneaked out of his crib and 
went searching for adventure. He toddled swiftly down the slope of 
Mount Cyllene until he came to a meadow where he saw a herd of 
beautiful white cows grazing. He saw no cowherd, and decid ed to 
steal them. A treeful of crows began to seethe and whistle, “They 
belong to Apollo . . . to Apollo . . . „pol lo ...,”  but he paid them no 
heed. He plaited grass into shoes for the cows, and fitted them over 
their hooves, and drove them away.  
When Apo llo returned, he was furious to see his cows gone  and even more 
furious when he searched for tracks and found none — only odd sweeping marks on the 
ground. The crows chattered, “A baby stole them … your brother, your brother ...“ But  
this made no sense to A pollo; b esides he did not trust crows. He did not know where to 
begin looking; he searched far and wide, but could find no clue.  
Then one morning he passed a cave he had passed a hundred times before. But 
this time he heard strange, beautiful sounds comin g out of it — sounds unlike anything 
he had ever heard before — and he looked inside. There, drowsing by the fire, was a 
tall lovely Titaness named Maia, whom h e had seen before in the garden on Olympus. 
Sitting in her lap was a little baby boy, doing some thing to a large tortoise shell from 
which the strange sounds seemed to be coming.  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 “Good clay, cousin,” said Apollo. “Are you to be congratulated on a new son?”  
“Hail, bright Phoebus,” said Maia. “May I have the honor of presenting your half-
brother, you ng Hermes?”  
“Half -brother, eh ? Well, that‟s an honor without being a distinction. What‟s that 
he‟s playing with?”  
“He makes his own toys,” said Maia proudly. “He‟s so clever, you can‟t imagine. 
He made this out of an old shell that he strung with cow gut , and from it he dra ws th e 
most ravishing sounds. Listen…”  
“Cowgut? May I ask what cow he persuaded to contribute her vital cords for his 
pastime?”  
“I do not understand your question, cousin.”  
“Understand this, cousin. I have had a herd of cows stolen re cently. The crows 
told me they had been taken by some baby, my brother, but I didn‟t believe them. I 
seem to owe them an apology.”  
 “What?” cried Maia. “Are you accusing this innocent babe of being a cattle thief? 
For shame!”  
“Mother, if you don‟t mind,”  said a clear little voice, “perhaps you‟d better let me 
handle this.” The baby stood on his mother‟s knee, and bowed to Apollo. “I did take your 
cows, brother. But I didn‟t know they were yours. How could I have? And they are quite 
safe, except for one. W ishing to begin my life with an act of piety, I sacrificed her to the 
twelve gods.”  
“Twelve, gods?” said Apollo haughtily. “I am acquainted with but eleven.”  
“Yes, sir,” said Hermes. “But I have the honor to be the twelfth. Above all things, I 
wish your good will, fair brother. So, in return for this cow, allow me to make you a 
present — this instrument. I call it a lyre. I‟ll be glad to teach you to play.”  
Apollo was enchanted with the trade. He stayed in the cave all that afternoon 
practicing his scale s. As he was strumming his new toy, he noticed Hermes cutting 
reeds, which the child swiftly tied together, notched in a certain way, then put to his lips, 
and began to make other sounds, even more beautiful than the lyre could produce.  
“What‟s that?” cri ed Apollo. “What do  you call that? I want that too. ”  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 “I don‟t need any more cows,” said Hermes.  
“I must have it. What else of mine do you wish?”  
“Your golden staff.”  
“But this is my herdsman‟s staff. Do you not know that I am the god of herdsmen, 
and t hat this is the rod of authority?”  
“A minor office,” sai d Hermes. “Unworthy of the lord of the sun. Perhaps you 
would allow me to take over the chore. Give me your golden staff, and I will give you 
these pipes.”  
“Agreed! Agreed!”  
“But since pipes and ly re together will make you god of music, I must have 
something to boot. Teach me augury.”  
 “You drive a hard bargain for a nursling,” said Apollo. “I think you belong on 
Olympus, brother. This cave will not long offer scope for your talents.”  
“Oh, yes, ta ke, me there!” cried Hermes. “I am eager to meet Father Zeus.”  
So Apollo took Hermes to Olympus, and introduced him to his father. Zeus was 
intrigued by the wit and impudence of the child. He hid him away from Hera, and spent 
hours conversing with him.  
“You say you wish to enter the Pantheon,” said Zeus. “But really — all the realms 
and powers seem to have been parceled out.”  
“Father, I am of modest nature,” said Hermes. “I require no vast dignities. Only a. 
chance to be useful, to serve you, and to dwel l in your benign and poten t presence. Let 
me be your herald. Let me carry  your tidings. You will  find me quick and resourceful, 
and what I can‟t remember I w ill make up. And, I guarantee, your subjects will get the 
message.”  
“Very well,” said Zeus. “I wil l give you a trial.”  
So Hermes became  the messenger god, and accomplished his duties with such 
swiftness, ingenuity, and cheerfulness that he became a favorite of his father, who soon 
rewarded him with other posts. Hermes became patron of liars and t hieve s and 
gamblers, god of com merce, framer of treaties, and guardian of travelers. Hades Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
became his client too, and called upon him to usher the newly dead from Earth to 
Tartarus.  
He kept a workshop on Olympus, and there invented the alphabet, astronomy, 
and the scales; also playing cards and card games, He carried Apollo‟s golden staff 
decorated with white ribbons, wore a pot -shaped hat, and winged sandals which carried 
him through the ai r more  swiftly than any bird could fly.  
It was he who gave Zeus‟ the id ea of disguising himself and mingling with mortals 
when bored wit h Olympus. He joined his father  in this, and th ey had many adventures 
together… which will be told in their place.  
 Hephaestus  
No one celebrated the birth of Hephaestus. His mother, 
Hera, had  awaited him with great eagerness, hoping for a child 
so beautiful, so gifted, that it would make Zeus forget his heroic 
swarm of children from lesser consorts. But when the baby was 
born she was appalled to see that he was shriveled and ugly, 
with an irri tating bleating wail. She did not wait for Zeus to see 
him, but snatched the infant up and hurled him off Olympus.  
For a night and a day he fell, and hit the ground at the edge of the sea with such 
force that both of his legs were broken. He lay there on the beach mewing piteously, 
unable to crawl, wracked with pain, but unable to die because he was i mmortal. Finally, 
the tide came  up. A huge wave curled him under its arm and carried him off to sea. And 
there he sank like a stone, and was caught by the pla yful Thetis, a naiad,  who thought 
he was a tadpole.  
When Thetis understood it was a baby she had caught, she made a pet of him, 
and kept him in her grotto. She was amazed at the way the crippled child worked shells 
and bright pebbles into jewelry. One day she appeared at a great festival of the gods 
wearing a necklac e he had made. Hera noticed the  ornament, and praised it, and asked 
her how she had come by it. Thetis told her of the strange twisted child whom someone 
had dropped into the ocean, and who live d now in her c ave making wonderful jewels. 
Hera divined that it was her own son, and demanded him back.  
Hephaestus returned to Olympus. There Hera presented him with a broken 
mountain nearby, where he could set up forges and bellows. She gave him the braw ny Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 
Cyclopes to be his helpers, and promised him Aphrodite as a bride, if he would labor in 
the mountain and make her fine things. Hephaestus agreed because he loved her, and 
excused her cruelty to him.  
“I know that I am ugly, Mother,” he said, “but t he fa tes would have it so. And I  will 
make you gems so beautiful for your tapering  arms and white throat and black hair that 
you will forget my ugliness sometimes, and rejoice that you have taken me back from 
the sea,”  
He became the smith -god, the great artif icer, lord of mechanics. And the 
mountain always smoked and rumbled with his toil.  
Aphrodite  
Aphrodite was the goddess of love and beauty; 
so there are more stories told about her than anyone 
else, god or mortal. Being what she is, she enters other 
storie s; and s uch is the power of her magic gi rdle that 
he who even speaks her name falls under her spell, and seems to glimpse her white 
shoulders and catch the perfume of her golden hair. And he loses his wits and begins to 
babble, and tells the same story in many way s. 
But all the tales agree that she is the goddess of desire , and, unlike other 
Olympians, is never distracted from her duties. Her work is her pleasure, her profession, 
her hobby. She thinks of nothing but love, and nobody expects more of her.  
She was born out of the primal murder. When Cronos butchered his father, 
Oranos, with the scythe his mother had given him, he flung the dismembered body off 
Olympus into the sea, where it floated, spouting blood and foam which drifted, whitening 
in the sun. From the foam rose a tall beautiful maiden, naked and dripping. Waves 
attended her. Poseidon‟s white horses brought her to the island of Cythera. Wherever 
she stepped, the sand turned to grass and flowers bloomed. Then she went to Cyprus. 
Hillsides burst i nto flowers, and the air was full of birds.  
Zeus brought her, to Olympus. She was still dripping from the sea. She wore 
nothing but the bright tunic of her hair which fell below her knees and was yellow as 
daffodils. She looked about the great throne room where the gods were assembled to 
meet her, arched her throat and laughed with joy.  Zeus, Hera , Athene , Poseidon , Hades , Demeter , Birth of the Twins , Artemis , Apollo , The 
Sons of Apollo , Hermes , Hephaestus , Aphrodite   
 Hera was watching Zeus narrowly. “You must marry her off,” she whispered. “At 
once — without delay!”  
“Yes,”  said Zeus. “Some sort of marriage would seem to be indicated.”  
And he said, “Brothers, sons, cousins, Aphro dite is to be married. She will choose her 
own husband. So make your suit.”  
The gods closed around her, shouting promises, pressing their claims. Earth -
shaking Poseidon swung his mighty trident to clear a space  about himself. “I claim you 
for the sea,” he said. “You are sea -born, foam -born, and belong to me. I offer you 
grottos, riddles, gems, fair surfaces, dark surroundings. I offer you variety. Drowned 
sailors, typhoons, sunsets. I offer you secrets. I offer you riches that the earth does not 
know — power more subtle, more fluid than the dull fixed land. Come with me — be 
queen of the sea.”  
He slammed his trident on the floor, and a huge green tidal wave swelled out of 
the sea — high, high as Olympus, curling  its mighty green tongue as if to lick up the 
mountain — and poised there, quivering, not breaking, as the gods gaped. Then 
Poseidon raised his trident, and the mighty wave subsided like a ripple. He bowed to 
Aphrodite. She smiled at him, but said nothing.   
Then the gods spoke in turn, offering her great gifts. Apollo offered her a throne 
and a crown made of hottest sun -gold, a golden chariot drawn by white swans, and the 
Muses for her handmaids. Hermes offered to make her queen of the crossways where 
all m ust come — where she would hear every story, see every traveler, know each 
deed — a rich pageant of adventure and gossip so that she would never grow bored.  
She smiled at Apollo and Herm es and made no answer.  
Then Hera, scowling, reached her long white a rm and dragged Hephaestus, the 
lame smith -god, from where he had been hiding behind the others, ashamed to be seen. 
And she hissed into his ear, “Speak, fool. Say exactly what I told you to say.”  
He limped forward with great embarrassment, and stood befor e the radiant 
goddess, eyes cast down, not daring to look at her. He said: “I would make a good 
husband for a girl like you. I work late.”  
Aphrodit e smiled. She said nothing, but  put her finger under the chin of the grimy 
little smith, raised his face, le aned down, and kissed him on the lips.  
That night they were married. And at the wedding party she finally spoke — 
whispering to each of her suitors — telling each one when he might come with his gift.  